in this video we are going to learn how to
delete the given node from a doubly linked list
So the node to be deleted can be the head
node or the last node or any intermediate node
We are going to discuss each case first
Let us see how to delete the head node
So we have a doubly linked list here with nodes
with values 10 20 and 30
Now to delete 10 which is the head
What We have to do it
We need to create a temporary variable pointing the head
And now we need to make the second node the
head of the list
So make the new head prev point null So the
link is deleted
now the node with temp is not a part
of the linked list
So this is how we can delete a head node
Now let us see the code to implement this
So we have a function delete to perform this task
So into the function we passed the head of the
linked list and the Key to be deleted
So here we have the key
Ten first we will check if the linked list is
empty
If so the deletion is not possible since there are
no nodes to be deleted
So we have if head equal to null then return
But here it is not so declared temp pointing to
head
Now we have temp pointing the head node
Now we have to find the node to be
deleted
We only know the key to be deleted which is
It could be present in any nodes
Data part
So first we have to find that particular node so
we can use a
while loop for that
We have to
iterate over the linked list till we find the
key
That is when temp dot data equal to key or
till we reached the end of the list
That is when temp becomes null
So we have while tempt not equal to null and
temp data not equal to key
So after the loop is terminated we will have our
required node pointed by temp
So in first iteration temp is pointing the head node
and temp data equal to key So the condition fails
Since we have our key in the current node that
is the first node
So control comes out and now in temp
We have the node to be deleted if temp equal
to null
It means the node to be deleted is not present
in this list
So check If temp equal to null then print key
is not found
But here it is not so Now the node to
be deleted is found And now it is the time
to check if it is the head or the last
node or any intermediate node
So first check if temp is equal to head And
here it is
So first make the second node be head
So we have head equal to head dot next now
removed the link or the Connexion So make new head
prev point to null so write head dot prev equal to
null so this first node is deleted from the list
So that's it that's how we delete the head node
of a doubly linked list
Now let us see the intermediate node case
So we have this linked list here and suppose we
need to delete the node with value 20 here
So first Iterate the list to find that particular
node and it is found now and is pointed by
temp and it is an intermediate node
So what we have to do is we have to
cut the links of this node from the list so
we need to connect temp's previous node and temp's
Next node
So make temp's
Previous nodes next pointing temp's
Next node and temp's
Next nodes prev pointing temp's Previous node
Now this particular node is deleted from the list and
that is how it is done
Now let us see the code to implement this here
let us delete the key 20 1st we have to follow
the same steps
So first check
If the linked list the empty but it is not
so made temp point to head and iterate over
the list to find the node to be deleted
So first
temp equal to 1000 not equal to null and temp data
equal to 10 not equal to 20
So go inside and move temp to next node
So we have temp equal to tempt dot Next
Now we have temp equal to 2000 and it is
not equal to null and temp data equal to 20
which is equal to key
So condition fails and control comes out of the while
loop
So first check if it is equal to null
But it is not so
The node to be deleted is found and it is
pointed by temp now check if it is head
But it is not so
check
If it is the last node and for the last
node it's next will be pointing null
So write if temp next equal to null
But it also fails
So we have the else part for the intermediate node
case
Here we will remove this node temp from the linked
list and temp is the node to be deleted
So make temp's previous nodes next pointing temp's
Next node
So write temp dot dot next equal to temp dot
Next
Now make temps next
nodes prev pointing to temps previous node
So write temp dot next dot prev equal to temp
dot prev Now the node is deleted from the list
Now let us see the case where we have to delete
the last node of a doubly linked list
So we have this list here and suppose we need
to delete the node with value 30
So first itereate the list to find that node
it is found now and is pointed by temp and
we can say it is the last node
So what we have to do is we have to
remove the link of this node from the list so
make its previous node the last node by making its
previous nodes next null and thus the last node can
be removed from the list
So that is how it is done
Now let us see the code to implement it
Here
The key to be deleted is 30
So we follow the same procedure check
If the linked list is empty but it is not
so
Make temp point to head and iterate over the
list to find the node to be deleted
So First temp equal to 1000 not equal to null and
temp dot data equal to 10 and not equal to
Key 30
So go inside and move temp to next node at
In the next iteration we have temp equal to 2000
and not equal to null and tempt data equal to
20 and not equal to key 30
So go inside and move temp to next node
Now we have temp equal to 3000 and again it
is not equal to null
And we have temp dot data equal to 30 which
is equal to key So this condition will fail and
control comes out of the while loop now
check
If it is null but it is not so
We have temp pointing to the node to be deleted
So check if it is the head
But it is not now check
If it is the last node and we know for
last node it's next will be null so right if
temp dot next equal to null
And it is true here which means the node to
be deleted is the last node here
So first make its previous node the last node for
that the previous nodes next should point to null
So write temp dot prev dot next equal to null and
this is how we can delete the last node from
a doubly linked list
Now a let us say another case of deletion
Let us try to delete key 60 from this doubly
linked list
So first we have to iterate over the list to
find the node with 60 and we won't find it
because it is not present so temp will reach the
last node and finally will have the value null
So let us see the code here first check if
the list is empty but it is not so set
temp equal to head and iterate over the list
So first Temp will be equal to 1000 and not equal to null and tempt
data will be 10 and not 60
So go inside move temp to next node and in
next iteration temp equal to 2000 and data equal to
20 again It is true
So go inside and moved temp to next node
And in next iteration we have temp equal to 3000
and temp data will be equal to 30
So again the condition is true
So go inside and moved temp to next node and
the next iteration We have temp equal to null so
the condition will fail and control comes out of while
now when checking if temp equal to null it is true
So the node to be deleted is not present so
print key is not found So these are the three
cases of deleting a node from a doubly linked list
If the node to be deleted is the head then
make the second node to be head and make the previous link
of new head null
And if the node to be deleted is the last
node
Then make the second last node the last node by
making its next equal to null
And if it isn't intermediate node then make its previous
node and next not connected and removed this node from
the list
So now let us discuss about the time complexity of
this operation
Actually the time complexity of deleting the node is order
of one
But it is the time taken to find the node
first so the best case time complexity will be
Then the node to be deleted is the head of
the linked list
So it will be order of one and the worst
case will be when the node to be deleted is
the last node of the linked list
Then you need to traverse the whole linked list to
find it and then deleted
So if you have n nodes then the worst case time is order of n.